the College of Education since 1977. OK,
today is October the 21st, and I'm interviewing
Dr. David Erlandson, who is the head of the
Educational Administration Department at Texas
A&M and has been with the College of Education
since 1977. And what we're going to talk about, I
guess, is the changes that have occurred since you
have been at Texas A&M. how you think these changes
have impacted the college, what do you feel maybe
were the causes, and a little bit about what or how
you think the college is achieving its mission of
teaching research and service, whether it has
changed from the previous administration to now.
So just a general, just how you feel. Actually, I
guess a lot of the things are in the archives, but
people's perceptions and feelings are not. And
that's what I'd like for you to share is certain
things that maybe I wouldn't find in any of the
documents. OK. And I'll take a few notes, too. OK.
When I think back over the past 10 years, now, in
many ways, when I first came here 10 years ago, it
was, I guess, a little bit of a culture shock,
because I come from New York City, Queens College,
and the City University of New York. And it would
have probably been hard to have chosen a place that
was more opposite. from what Queens College was
than Texas University, Texas A&M University.
In fact, I can remember somebody asking me after
I'd been here about
two or three years, and I met a gentleman from
Boston when I was down visiting interns in
Houston. And he knew something about Queens
College, and he knew something about Texas A&M. He
was, as I recall, he consulted Texas Instruments
and Computers. And he asked me what I thought, or he
asked me how I would compare the two institutions.
And I thought about it just a moment, and I said to
him, well, I said, compare the two institutions.
The best thing about Texas A&M is that there's no
graffiti on the walls. I said the worst thing about
Texas A&M is that there's no graffiti on the walls.
Okay. Because I think one of the things that, you
know, as I came from teaching in college ten years
ago, I was certainly impressed by the
cleanliness, almost the squeaky clean nature of
the institution. I also was impressed by the, if
you want, the Lack of fertility of thought, the
almost stability in the thought of many people,
students and faculty. In fact, I guess one of the
other pieces of culture shock that I first noted
when I first came in my first class, I noticed that
when I began speaking, everybody was writing
everything down that I said. And if I gave an
assignment, there are no questions about the
assignment. They just went ahead and did it to the
best of their ability. It's quite a contrast from
Queens College, where anything I said was
challenged. Every assignment I gave was, is that
really the best thing? And what's the educational
intent of this? And that is very different. So what
do you attribute that to? sterility of thought, as
you put it, in the college? What do you think would
cost that? Well, I think the traditions of
engineering on the one hand, the dominance of
engineering, where they prefer specific, clear
answers in which they're trained in a way to come up
with solutions and the best solution within
relatively short periods of time. That, I think,
possibly also the military tradition, where
there is always somebody in charge and you take the
orders from above. I think that was part of it. Even
though this was an education? Even though this was
an education, yes. I think it spilled over
throughout the university.
I'll get back to a couple of the reasons. Also, I
think that it was true in education, but one of the
differences I noted, for instance, between here
and Queens also is If I give a written assignment at
Queens, I may or may not get any assignments I ask
for on time.
Those that came in, some of them would be done
sloppily. Some would be absolutely brilliant,
perceptive, creative. Once I got at Texas A&M,
tended all more to look alike. They were on to them.
They were correct, often not extremely creative.
Now, this is an assumption on my part to a great
extent. I think that much of it goes to the
institution, also to the clientele, the kind of
student that it was drawing and what students were
looking for in coming to Texas A&M. But I think also
if you look at the administration, and the faculty
that were there and had been there for many years,
you got a similar kind of focus and emphasis.
One of the things that I liked very much about Texas
A&M after having been in New York is that they had a
nicely streamlined administrative structure.
There wasn't a lot of burgeoning, empty,
deadening bureaucracy, in the worst sense of the
word. Since I've been at Texas A&M, I've never felt
that if I had a question about something or if I
wanted to do something, I always could get a clear,
definitive answer. That may be less true now than
it was then, but I think we are getting something of
a bureaucracy in the bad sense of the term. But it
was very, the change of command, where you would go
for answers, where you would go for approval was
very clear. Quite a contrast to New York. You never
know who to ask. You send up a formal request
through channels and you never know what happened
to it. You never know what decision maker at what
level cut the thing off or if it just disappeared.
It was very, very frustrating. Here was much
better in that respect. Who recruited you,
Brandon? Did you apply yourself or did somebody
actually Oh, I think that if I had to name one
person, it probably would be John Hoyle. I had
known John for a number of years through mutual
endeavors in the National Conference of
Professors of Educational Administration. And I
would say he was. He also played with me with Paul
Henshaw Lane and with some of the others. Then my
application, I took it from there. I was anxious to
get out of City University of New York because they
were facing bankruptcy. And in fact, they had just
given us a furlough for a couple of weeks without
pay in order to help solve a little bit of the
problem. And it didn't look like it. It wasn't very
encouraging. I was looking around, and this being
a possibility, so I was very eager to take it. How
long after you were here did you become department
head? Seven years after I was here. I became
department head in 1984. As I say, I think that some
of the people who were here, like certainly Dean
Huber in the College of Education, was very much
nuts and bolts, no-nonsense administrator. He
liked to keep his
lines of control. very clean. He liked to keep them
all in his own hands. We, at that time in 1977, we
just had a new president who was a former Aggie,
Jarvis Miller, who also projected the same kind of
image. And I think at that time the institution was
still fostering that. And things have changed
gradually, I think, throughout the university. I
mean, right now we have a very, very different kind
of president
who, you know, I think by nearly anyone's account
probably is not a very efficient administrator.
He comes across much more as the intellectual
leader, as the stimulator. That's a vastly
different kind of setting. I think there are some
negatives to that. I think right now the
bureaucracy probably is growing somewhat. It's
hard to get the specific answer. It's hard to
always determine exactly where decisions are
made. Within, are you speaking about the college
or the whole university? Within the university
right now. Within the college, being a much
smaller kind of an operation, that hasn't been
true. Of course, we had our change in 1980 when Dean
Corrigan came. And once again, a night and day
change. A person who did not see all the lines of
authority coming out of his own office. or tying
back to his own office, no need for reporting every
small detail, much more of a willingness to give
responsibility to others, delegate to that
responsibility, and allow others to pursue the
mission as they saw it in the way that they saw it,
and to build the college on that kind of a trust
relationship.
Couple of things as we parallel it with the
university. One, being a member of a very small
department, a relatively small department in
contrast to the others in the College of
Education, two of which are much larger, is that
bureaucracy as such has always been less of a
problem for us. And also, there's another piece,
too. You never see the bureaucracy. when you're
right in the middle of it. And one of the things that
Dean Corrigan did early, sort of, if you want a new
piece of bureaucracy introduced, was his
steering committee for fostering educational
inquiry, his own inquiry effort, which was sort of
a loose kind of bureaucracy, but nevertheless was
another kind of a structure sort of superimposed
upon the operating structure of departments. Did
you find a little resistance to that? Oh, yes.
Yeah, there was a lot of resistance. Quiet, not
loud, but there was a simple foot dragging,
probably still is. I guess there probably still
is, much less now. However, one of the reasons that
I guess that I never felt the weight of that
bureaucracy is because I was always part of that
from the beginning. When you first put together
the Steering Committee for Fostering
Educational Inquiry, I was invited to be the EDAD
representative on it, And then later I chaired
that committee. So I never saw it. Now as
department head, sitting on the policy
committee, we're making the decisions. I'm not
entirely aware of the bureaucracy as it's built up
or as others may feel it. I think I've got a fairly
good feel for how it operates in our department and
how our professors feel it. And I say fairly good
because it certainly is not perfect. But because
we have a relatively small department, there are
just 11 full-time members, I can get pretty good
face-to-face feedback. In the two really large
departments, curriculum instruction or C&I, I
know that they've got, you know, assistant
department and heads of programs and all that sort
of thing. And I would think that you might find the
responses there very different. Was there a real
big shift when this came about from the mission of
the college? Did it change very drastically from
Hubert as far as emphasis on research? Because
that seemed to be Corrigan's big thing as soon as he
came in with his inquiry. And how was it in place
before that? Well, yeah.
In specific language, I don't think of what the
mission was stated. or as it was supposed by the two
deans, I think was probably less different than
what it actually was in operation.
Dean Hubert also believed
in research and he worked hard to bring good
researchers into the College of Education and
once they got here to give them considerable
resources so that they could do their work.
The biggest difference there was that his
definition of research was much more restricted.
I think also his definition of service may have
been somewhat more restricted. Having come up
himself in the public schools of Texas and worked
with TA, I think in terms of what he envisioned
for ways that the university could interact with
schools was pretty much a function of what he had
experienced himself and the types of things.
The state of differences weren't that different.
The operational differences was. One other piece
of operational difference is that when Dean Huber
took over the College of Education, when General
Rutter brought him here to Texas A&M, he was
determined he was going to build the College of
Education on hard state money. There are a lot of
horror stories from around the country of
colleges of education particularly, as well as
other colleges, but colleges of education
particularly that haven't built on soft money,
there's grant money. And then when the grant money
was gone, they collapsed. There was all sorts of
acrimony. There was people losing their jobs, et
cetera. And Frank Hubert saw, I think, that his job
to build a college of education, to build a strong
college of education, was to build it entirely on
hard money.
I think that was a wise decision, because I think if
it had been done any other way, the College of
Education would not have received the strong
foundation that it did while he was here. How much
is that true today? Is it still on hard money? Much
less. Much less. We're still on much more hard
money than most
colleges of education and comparable
universities are. We're bringing in, I believe,
considerably more grant money. That's something
you can check out. I couldn't actually quote you
the figures, but I think we're doing considerably
better, even though the funding sources have
decreased. I see one of the things that Dean Healer
would never want to have, he would never want one of
his professors supported with grant money. He
wanted them all to be paid with state funds. which
has some powerful implications, because it means
that, OK, you can go ahead and conduct this
project, get this grant, do this research for this
grant that you want to do, but you've still got to
teach your class load, full class load, because
that's what we're paying you for. The rest is sort
of fun and games. And I think Oregon has seen the
research, the inquiry, much more of a central
focus than Dean here or Tim. Was there as much
collaboration between departments as there is
now, or is there more now? How does that stand in the
two? That's a good question. I
think there's probably more
collaboration now than there was, to a great
extent because of the inquiry structure that cuts
across departments. And that was Gene Bergen's.
expectation in other ways though i would
hypothesize that there may be less there may be
less now uh because uh when the college of edu
college of education of course came out of the
department of education and psychology and uh for
a while during its maturation and growth College
of Education was probably really little more than
a large department. I mean, they were formal
divisions now with department heads, et cetera.
But some of the departments were, like ours, was
really very, very small before we started adding
members. I mean, just very small. And it means that
the collegial relationships were necessarily
developed with other people. And if you go back
with, what, the old-timers, in the College of
Education, particularly some of those who were
around in the last days of the Department of
Education and Psychology, they still have a lot of
personal ties and a style of operation that harks
back to that. And I think new members of the College
of Education don't have that same type of thing.
People when I came in 77,
which was, you know, considerably after, a
considerable time after the College of Education
was formed, I still by necessity formed a lot of,
got to know and began working with people in the
other departments. Now, I'm not sure that that's
true.
The, I would say we have some departments, some of
our professors who except for Maybe the formal
requirements of some particular committee work,
or maybe working jointly on a pro-seminar, or some
specific assignment, have practically no
contact at all outside of the department. That's
probably even more true for the large
departments.
I'm concerned, for instance, with one of our new
professors, with Yvonne Gonzalez in the
Principal Center, that she doesn't have enough
contact with all the people in the college,
basically. There were other little things, too.
It's just an aside, but I think it's a function of
the same thing. Speaking for myself, and so I'm
pointing to the finger of myself, I haven't been to
a White Alta Kappa meeting in a local chapter in a
long time. But I noticed in looking over our slate
of officers for this year, I think there are two
assistant professors from the college on there.
Maybe two or three, but about that number. Most of
the people are either graduate students or not
related to the college. When I first came here, it
was the Don Barkers and the Glenn Johnsons, John
Hoyles, and the others, the key people in the
College of Education, the key professors, who
were also part of the capital larger picture It
seems to be less of a concern. Well, for instance,
last night, the local part of the chapter met, and
Ken Kaepernick was speaking. I always enjoy
hearing from Ken. He's always very candid. And I
debated it for a while, and then just decided I
needed time more for other kinds of things. Well,
that's tragic in a way. I think we're in danger of
losing something, a broader scope. I mean, the
better things, of course, for me, have become
things tied more directly to administration and
what we're doing. In a sense, that's good, because
we're doing some very exciting things. We're also
losing that overall view. And that's unfortunate
that that occurred. In your department
specifically, do you feel that the department is
much more to service than it is, of course,
teaching is everybody, that's one of the primary
goals, I guess, in every department, first and
foremost, but there's some departments that are
very, are leaning very much towards the research,
and I guess psychology, educational psychology
would be one that's heavy, heavy into the
research, and is there a balance within
departments as to, you know, because I would think
that administration It would have to be more
service, would it not? We're very, very heavy into
service. In fact, I think if you look right now at
our best research efforts, the research efforts
are flowing out of the service. Now, that's not
entirely a one-way street. I think some of the
service efforts are also flowing out of the
research we're doing. But I would say that
the more powerful drive has to be coming out of the
service and motivation. Part of that is because,
well, we now have two quasi-independent centers
within the community education center and the
principal center. Both of them, of course, take
their existence from the fact that they're
service centers. And research is always in the
support of service by definition of what they're
doing. That's what causes it. We have some
research isn't, for instance. I would say it's
going the other way. Harold Hawkins' current work
with his interface between learning and school
plant, that study he's conducting, I would say
it's primarily research driven. It has obvious
service implications, but it's research good.
What we're doing with the management profile,
myself and John Hoyle, I'm not sure which is in the
driver's seat on that. I think one shifted from one
point to another, and that's maybe the balance
between the two. Very good. Now, how do you think or
feel that the university or the college is
perceived by outsiders outside even A&M outside
of the state. I know you do a lot of consulting, and
you're visible in a lot of national
organizations, and a lot of your people are. What
is the general feeling as you travel around and
participate in all this? How do they see our
College of Education in relation to the others?
Well, much, much better than they did 10 years ago.
There's no question that we've risen in the esteem
of observers from around the nation. I'm getting
many more
personal calls and direct inquiry about our
students to fulfill professor's positions in
other universities.
In some areas, the service areas,
I think that we really stand out for, even among
those other institutions that are also service
oriented. I think the things we're doing there are
exemplary.
The research,
well I think if you looked at the, now this is, I'm
speaking for educational administration, it's
probably less true in educational psychology,
but if you went back to the
classical researchers in the last 30 years, the
positivistic researchers that have dominated
educational administrations as well as all of
education, I would say they would look at what
we're doing and think we're doing a pretty good
job, but are not overly impressed by it. Yeah, I
think that would be a fair estimate. uh they don't
think we're doing any we don't look at some things
that we've done and like them very well but other
things that they're just not not super super
impressed uh but on the other hand uh it's one of my
doctoral students who had a final defense in uh
august and will graduate in december uh picked up
by lsu uh phyllis lot naturalistic research had
been vacated by bill greenfield and we're perhaps
and maybe the top name in that area
in the educational administration. I think
that's a... Okay, now we talked a little bit about
the past and what's going on right now. My study
will cover all three with just a little bit of
looking towards the future. How do you feel from
when you're sitting as head of your department
that the college is going, say, not just the year
2000, which everybody seems to be talking about
right now, but even a little beyond that? I
think one of the things that is going to have to
happen, I have to say have to happen because, no,
it's not going to have to happen. I can go either one
or two ways. One of the things that ought to happen,
I guess it's better to say, is that we need to become
much more focused in our mission. One of the things
I think that emerged with the new era that was
actually given by Dean Corrigan was the feeling
that we could do anything we wanted and we could do
everything we wanted. The latter may be true,
probably isn't, but it may be true. Excuse me, the
former may be true. probably the latter
definitely is not true. There's no way that we can
do everything that we would like to do. We're tired
just having done what we've done and we've wasted a
lot of effort. I think we need to define what it is we
do well and do that. I think part of what's occurred
in the past has been that we've been trying to
establish that name, that reputation. I think
we've pretty well done that now. People know who we
are. I think now is the time for us to refine and do
things on a smaller scale extremely well. And I
think that applies across the board. For
instance, in teacher training, we're now
preparing more teachers than any other
institution, more science teachers. In Texas,
more science teachers than any other institution
in the nation. Maybe we need to cut back. Maybe
since we can't do everything, we just ought to make
the best of it. And we literally do the best. And I
think in administration, that's true. Rather
than trying to do new things, I think that we need
now to focus, to refine. The same with the
management profile. It's going places. Rather
than doing anything new, we need to refine, make
that better, learn how to improve on that. I'd say
the same thing would be for all the things that
we're trying to do. In every department or just
your department? I'm saying for our department
now, but I think that the same thing holds true
across the college. Since the college is geared or
is called, you know, the research, a research
center or university or whatever, is there
pressure on each college to focus on the research
exclusively? There's not a lot of research here.
There's not a lot of pressure here. I think
research occurs, and we're conscious of it, and we
want it to occur, but there isn't a lot of research.
I think there is a pretty fair amount of research.
There isn't a lot of pressure on research.
There probably could be more research. Not all of
our professors, either in our department or I'm
sure across the college, are as productive
research as they could be and ought to be. I know
that that's true for our department. But
nevertheless, we have some very, very good pieces
of research coming up, excellent pieces.
Professor research and doctoral dissertation
research.
But the pressure is not there.
Just by way of contrast,